Chapter 1: The Power of Habits

Every habit you have—good or bad—follows the same three-step pattern: cue, routine, and reward. This is what researchers call the "habit loop."

The cue is the trigger that tells your brain to go into automatic mode and which habit to use. The routine is the behavior itself—the action you take. The reward is what helps your brain figure out if this particular loop is worth remembering for the future.

Over time, this loop—cue, routine, reward—becomes more and more automatic. The cue and reward become intertwined until a powerful sense of anticipation and craving emerges. Eventually, a habit is born.

Habits aren't destiny. They can be ignored, changed, or replaced. But the reason the discovery of the habit loop is so important is that it reveals a basic truth: When a habit emerges, the brain stops fully participating in decision making.

To understand your own habits, you need to identify the components of your loops. Once you have diagnosed the habit loop of a particular behavior, you can look for ways to supplant old vices with new routines.


Chapter 2: The Science of Cravings

Habits are powerful because they create neurological cravings. Most of the time, these cravings emerge so gradually that we're not really aware they exist, so we're often blind to their influence.

But as we associate cues with certain rewards, a subconscious craving emerges in our brains that starts the habit loop spinning. One researcher at MIT noticed that a particular rat seemed to be anticipating its reward before it even got to the end of the maze.

This is how habits become powerful: They create neurological cravings. This is the core secret of habit-building: Creating and sustaining a craving that drives the loop.

The craving is what powers the habit loop. And figuring out how to spark a craving makes creating a new habit easier.


Chapter 3: The Golden Rule of Habit Change

You can't extinguish a bad habit, you can only change it. The Golden Rule of habit change states: Keep the cue, provide the same reward, but insert a new routine.

If you use the same cue, and provide the same reward, you can shift the routine and change the habit. Almost any behavior can be transformed if the cue and reward stay the same.

The rule applies to almost any habit. To change a habit, you must keep the old cue, and deliver the old reward, but insert a new routine.

For some habits, however, there's one other ingredient that's necessary: belief. Belief is essential, and it grows out of a communal experience, even if that community is only as large as two people.


Chapter 4: Keystone Habits

Some habits have the power to start a chain reaction, changing other habits as they move through an organization or a life. These are known as "keystone habits."

The habits that matter most are the ones that, when they start to shift, dislodge and remake other patterns. Keystone habits say that success doesn't depend on getting every single thing right, but instead relies on identifying a few key priorities and fashioning them into powerful levers.

Exercise is a keystone habit that triggers widespread change. When people start habitually exercising, even as infrequently as once a week, they start changing other, unrelated patterns in their lives, often unknowingly.

The trick to identifying keystone habits is figuring out where the biggest leverage lies. A keystone habit creates small wins that trigger other positive changes.


Chapter 5: The Power of a Crisis

During turmoil, organizational habits become malleable enough to both assign responsibility and create a more equitable balance of power.

Destructive organizational habits can be changed when leaders use the turbulence of a crisis to trigger new habits.

When a crisis arrives, the existing rules are suspended and behaviors are up for grabs. That's why wise leaders often prolong or even extend a crisis, knowing it's the opportunity to shape the company.

The key is harnessing the sense of crisis to remake habits and organizational routines.
